# Why you should study Mormonism scientifically

## Motivation

The purpose of this post is to draw attention to what makes Mormonism a unique doctrine.  I'm aiming to convince people not necessarily to convert to Mormonism, but to study it from a scientific perspective: to study it objectively and consider its main ideas, traditions, quirks, and answers to life's questions.

### Audience

This post is addressed to Tim Urban, the main author of the fantastic blog [Wait But Why](http://waitbutwhy.com/).  It is also addressed to anyone else who wonders about [religion](http://waitbutwhy.com/2014/10/religion-for-the-nonreligious.html), [existence](http://waitbutwhy.com/2014/12/what-makes-you-you.html), [artificial intelligence](http://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificial-intelligence-revolution-2.html), [cryonics](http://waitbutwhy.com/2016/03/cryonics.html), [identity](http://waitbutwhy.com/2014/12/what-makes-you-you.html), etc.

### Personal security

I'm writing this not so much because affirming what I know makes me feel more comfortable about it, but rather because I want to share the reasons behind why I enjoy such great personal security considering all the problems and questions that are present in our lives.

### Full disclosure/disclaimer

I am Mormon, meaning I'm a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  The views expressed in this post are my own, although I will make my best effort to describe Mormon doctrine and beliefs as accurately as possible.

## How Mormonism sets itself apart

This is probably easiest for people like me to tell because I am am Mormon.  I'm sure it's easiest for Jews to point out the ways Judaism is unique, Baptists to make clear how Baptist churches are different, Muslims to recognize what sets Islam apart, etc.

For those who such a comparison isn't so obvious, here are some of the parts of Mormonism I personally find intriguing.

### Amount of doctrine

In addition to having three more books of scripture than the average Christian church, Mormons live by countless additional declarations, manuals, commentaries, and discourses, many of which are approved by the central leadership of the Church.

### Continual Revelation

Unlike almost every other religion on earth, Mormons believe in continua revelation.  They believe that certain living people are called to be prophets and those prophets commune with God daily to receive direction for church members.  They believe that changes in policy and interpretation of doctrine is endorsed by God not because it is supported by ancient texts such as the Bible, but because God actively communicates with living people to reveal His will to them.

### Personal revelation

This principle of continual revelation applies to individuals as well—Mormons believe that any individual, regardless of race, gender, religion, etc. has the privilege of receiving personal communication from God for his or her own life.  This personal revelation is in fact essential to being converted to Mormon beliefs.

### Continuity across the world

Many religions have a small set of standards that defines them.  The interpretation of these standards and practices at a local level are usually left up to local church leaders.  Mormons have a vast infrastructure of leaders that ensure correlation and continuity across the globe.  In every congregation members use the same lesson manuals and teach lessons in roughly the same order.  Church-wide announcements take effect immediately worldwide.

## The Plan of Salvation

The Plan of Salvation is a core Mormon doctrine that explains the answers to three big questions: Where were we before we were born?  Why are we here on earth?  Where do we go after we die?  I'll briefly summarize what Mormons believe about each of these points.

### Where were we before we were born?

Before we were born, we lived with God.  We didn't have bodies, but existed as intelligences.  God did have a body, and He loved us, so He created the earth and a system by which we could gain bodies of our own.

### Why are we here on earth?

We live on earth mostly to prepare to return to God's presence.  This is a test run for our bodies—we'll eventually die and our intelligence will be separated from it.  However, while we're on earth, we need to show God that we're worthy of His trust by taking care of what He's given us already (a body, a family, a home, talents, opportunities, etc.).  If we follow His guidelines as He reveals them through certain messengers called prophets, He'll have evidence that we're worthy of receiving even more in the life to come.

### Where do we go after we die?

When we die, our intelligence is separated from our body for a while.  After some time, they will be reunited and God will judge us according to what we did on earth.  Depending on how well we followed His rules and guidelines, we'll receive different levels of inheritance.  We then continue to live with our reward as immortal beings.

## Answers to common issues

It's with the perspective of very clear doctrinal beliefs that I consider the following issues.  I'm not so worried about the fate of the world directly resulting from mishandling the following.  More than anything I'm worried that if people on earth as a whole don't shape up, God won't protect us from these kinds of disasters.

### Will a artificial super intelligence take over the world?

I believe that a super intelligence is already in control for the world, and that super intelligence is God.  God is already orders of magnitude more intelligent than us, and is be able to prevent us from seriously endangering ourselves.

### What's up with the Fermi Paradox?

If God created the world as an environment for us to learn how to control our bodies and obey His rules, it makes sense that He would prevent us from discovering life on other planets.  My idea is that we're in a kind of experiment under controlled conditions.

### Should we worry about using fossil fuels?

Certainly.  We can hope that God will prevent a disaster that wipes out humanity, but oftentimes He allows the natural consequences of our actions to serve as punishment and a learning experience for us.

Earth has been untrusted to humankind and we would do well not to abuse that trust by being negligent about our energy harvest and consumption.  We may face consequences after this life as well as during it if we neglect our responsibilities.

### Do we need to colonize Mars to safeguard against a disaster that might wipe out life on earth?

Seeing as God loves us and that our purpose on earth is to learn and have experiences, it is unlikely that God will simply allow an extraterrestrial species or force to destroy us.

That being said, colonizing Mars is super cool so let's do it!

### Do we need to invest in cryonics?

Part of the Plan of Salvation is being resurrected with perfect, immortal bodies.  We'll be able to remember everything that happened to us on Earth as well as everything that happened to us before we were born.  Basically, God already established a cryonics program for us that relies on vastly superior technology.  Our bodies don't need to be preserved because God knows how to completely reconstruct them.

### What really makes you you?

People as we see them in our day-to-day lives consist of spirits and physical bodies.  Your spirit existed before you were born and birth united your spirit with a physical body.  When you die your spirit will separate from your physical body until the resurrection, when it will be reunited with your physical body forever.

Your main identity is contained in your spirit.  If people were to develop some kind of teleportation technology that worked by breaking down the body in the starting location and building a new one at the final destination, they would have to make sure the spirit somehow goes along with the body.

Similarly, with cryonics, humans would have to be able to call a spirit back into its physical body in order for life to resume.

### Why is there such questionable evidence that God exists?

The big question.  There's unimaginable mystery surrounding God, and it seems every reason to believe and to not believe in Him.  Philosophical proofs and thought experiments for and against go in circles or break down without making much progress.

I believe the answer is simple: if it were obvious that God existed, there would be no challenge in obeying His laws.  If we were born knowing that an all-powerful being could end our lives in a second if we didn't obey Him to the letter, the trust experiment would be for naught.  Before we came to earth, we already lived with God.  We needed to be separated from God for a time in order to progress.  It's the most foolproof way God can know who He can trust and who He should reward.

In the same way, if it were provable that God didn't exist, no one would ever believe.  Thus God maintains a delicate balance of anonymity.

## What now?

Now that you're interested in the way Mormons think, you'll need to know the best ways you can learn more.  How did they come to know what they do?  How are they so confident?  Read on in the next post, [How to study Mormonism scientifically](#).
